Create comment_copy_guidelines.md (#61)
exercism/automated-analysis: docs/comment_copy_guidelines.md

# Comment Copy Guidelines

This document sets guidelines for the comments produced by the analyzer. The

> [Feedback guidlines][git-feedback-guidelines] talk about _when_ to comment and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Feedback guidelines][git-feedback-guidelines] talk about _when_ to comment and
```

_what_ to comment. This document talks mostly about _how_ to comment.

## Working directory for contents

Comments for the analyzer live in the [`exercism/website-copy`][git-website-copy]

> repository. Changes should be made via a PR on this repository, changing only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
repository. Changes should be made via a PR on this repository, only changing
```

the comments for one analyzer at a time. These will get the
[`type/analyzer-comments` label][git-website-copy-label].

### Generic comments

Some comments are language specific and not exercise specific. These should be
extracted into a generic comments file, in order to not duplicate commentary,
which would lead to either outdated commentary or shotgun surgery when a change
is made.

## CI

Because the comments don't live in the same repository as the analyzer, each

> analyzer should have CI that chacks if the comments used in that specific

Reviewer: ```suggestion
analyzer should have CI that checks if the comments used in that specific
```

analyzer (those that can become output), are comments on the `master` branch, on 
the  [`exercism/website-copy`][git-website-copy] repository.

> At moment of writing, [this issue][issue-ci-comments] tracks the status of any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the moment of writing, [this issue][issue-ci-comments] tracks the status of any
```

generalisation of this CI, if any.

## Wording

- Avoid unnecessarily wordy comments. Be concise.

> - Be neutrally observational; avoiding charged statements and blanket statements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Be neutrally observational; avoiding charged statements and blanket statements.
```

- Make the recommendation explicit.
- When possible, put the recommendation first, then the explanation.
- Avoid "me", "I", "we", etc, since the bot is not a person.
- Avoid "you" and "your code", because it can sometimes come across as judging 
  the person rather than the code.
- Avoid words like "just", "simply", "obviously", which can come across as 
  condescending: if the comment is necessary, it was _obviously_ not _obvious_.
- Avoid making assumptions about what people know and don't know. The only

>   exception is knowledge from earlier tracks in the _core_ exercises only. Avoid

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  exception is knowledge from already completed _core_ exercises. Avoid
```

  "as you know", "as you remember", "as you learned", "now that we all

>   undertstand x", because even though something was said, the person doesn't 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  understand x", because even though something was said, the person doesn't 
```

>   undertstand x", because even though something was said, the person doesn't 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  undertstand x", because even though something was said, the person didn't 
```

>   necessarily understood it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  necessarily understand it.
```

> ### Early exercises

Reviewer 2: Maybe rename to `### Guidance`?

Author: Yes, I like.

Author: But It ís especially for early exercises. How would we like to communicate that?

Reviewer 2: I think the sentence is fine.

  tremendously exhilarating experience, and the emotional kick makes it 
  memorable. However, if the discovery **doesn't** trigger a dopamine hit, it 
  makes total sense to show what it looks like.
- **Don't overly explain a concept**: don't go in depth about the underlying 
  mechanisms of compilers and things. In this case it's more about this being 
  one of the first exercises in the language track, and at this stage feedback
  is more helpful if it's shorter and more directive.
- **Give a link** that shows exactly how to do the concept, in a **tutorial** 
  kind of way. Meaning: showing how to do things, not discussing why. This might
  mean that the official docs of the language don't suffice, as these are often
  a code reference and don't show you how to use it and how it works. _However_,
  you should provide a link only for more in-depth exploration. The person
  should be able to understand what you mean from the answer directly, without
  following the link.

### Examples

In JavaScript, a student has written a top-level constant with `let`. 

```markdown
<!-- not following these guidelines -->
As you know, everyone uses const, you shouldn't use let or var.
```

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add something here like: "This comment is problematic for the following reasons:"

> - The action is after the "explanation".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The action comes after the "explanation".
```

- "As you know": we don't know if the student does.
- "you shouldn't": you don't need the "you" to make this statement.

> - "everyone uses const": this isn't true ánd can make the student feel as if

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "everyone uses const": this isn't true _and_ can make the student feel as if
```

  they did something horribly wrong.
- Lacks an actual explanation of _why_ the advice is given.

```markdown
<!-- better -->

> Prefer const and let over var. The `const` declaration tells readers, 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prefer `const` and `let` over `var`. The `const` declaration stops a variable from being accidentally reassigned, which provides safety, and reduces cognitive load for someone reading the code. [This article](https://medium.com/javascript-scene/javascript-es6-var-let-or-const-ba58b8dcde75) explains the difference between the three.
```

> “this variable is never reassigned”, reducing cognitive load and improving 

Reviewer: Is something missing here? This line reads a bit awkward to me.

Author: Suggestion didn't apply correctly.

maintainability.
```

In Go, a student has created a custom error instead of using the built-in ones:

```markdown
<!-- not following these guidlines -->
I see you are creating a custom `error`. This is perfectly fine! If you did not
know about `errors.New` and `fmt.Errorf` have a look at them as they are much 
simpler ways to create an error. Custom errors are helpful if you want to check 
if an error is of a certain type later.
```

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add something here like: "This comment is problematic for the following reasons:"

- "I see": the analyzer is not a person: avoid I.
- "This is perfectly fine!": Apparently it's not otherwise the reassuring wasn't
  necessary. This probably can be left out all together; if you want to give a
  generic tip about something existing, you can say exactly that: "An
  alternative, equally valid way of doing x is y."
- "If you did not know about": Leave this overly wordy word group out.

```markdown
<!-- better -->
A custom `error` is typically used to provide custom behavior, or to distinguish
on type later. For simpler cases, it's more common to rely on `errors.New` or 

> `fmt.Errorf`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`fmt.Errorf`. This [in depth article](https://golangbot.com/custom-errors/) about custom errors might be interesting.
```

> # Comment Copy Guidelines

Reviewer 3: Maybe I am missing some context but I ask myself every time what the meaning of this headline is. I also have the impression that people are confusing this to be a guideline for mentoring comments and start applying them to their personal mentoring style. With some points described here this might be good, but some should definitely not be applied to personal mentoring.

Suggestion: "Comment Guidelines for Auto-Mentoring"

Reviewer 2: As a side note (but also maybe its the point), I think we need some general mentoring guidelines in another repo too.

Author: I'm meh on this, since this is the _automated mentoring_ repository; however if it helps at least 1 person, happy to change. How about one of these:

- Auto-Mentoring Comment Copy Guidelines
- Auto-Mentoring Comment Guidelines
- Comment Copy Guidelines for Auto-Mentoring
- Comment Guidelines for Auto-Mentoring
- something else?

I personally like some indication that this is about the commentary itself, not about comments in general, since _when_ to comment is covered in a different document.

Author: > Find something positive to say about their code if possible.

For what it's worth, I generally am _very_ positive when mentoring, because every submission is a step forward and I think encouragement is great, but saying something positive for the sake of something positive, in a similar manor as to how _some_ people (and companies) want PR reviews to go, is not something that is appreciated _in every culture_.

For example: In a large cross-section of my personal circles, empty positivity (like "The Praise Sandwich") for the sake of saying something positive, is considered **extremely rude** because it's ingenuous and completely removes meaning which detracts from anyone _actually being positive_.

Begin neutral is generally safer.

This document sets guidelines for the comments produced by the analyzer. The
[Feedback guidelines][git-feedback-guidelines] talk about _when_ to comment and
_what_ to comment. This document talks mostly about _how_ to comment.

## Working directory for contents

Comments for the analyzer live in the [`exercism/website-copy`][git-website-copy]
repository. Changes should be made via a PR on this repository, only changing
the comments for one analyzer at a time. These will get the

> [`type/analyzer-comments` label][git-website-copy-label].

Reviewer 3: It might be worth adding a section or a paragraph on the format of the comments and their mapping to the `folder/file` structure.
Could be something like this:

> Comments are saved in `*.md` files, one comment per file. A comments handle output by the analyzer should be mapped to the corresponding file structure by replacing `.` with `/`:
> - `csharp.general.convert_field_to_constant` => `automated-comments/csharp/general/convert_field_to_const.md`
> - `go.two-fer.missing_package_comment` => `automated-comments/go/two-fer/missing_package_comment.md`

Reviewer 3: Maybe a link to the output definition of the analyzer where there is more the comments format.

Reviewer 2: I've asked a question on [Slack about this](https://exercism-team.slack.com/archives/CFMEG1H0C/p1562020228338300) too.

### Generic comments

Some comments are language specific and not exercise specific. These should be
extracted into a generic comments file, in order to not duplicate commentary,
which would lead to either outdated commentary or shotgun surgery when a change

> is made.

Reviewer 4: Is there a file structure for generic comment files?

Author: Not that I know

Reviewer 3: > a generic comments file

Shouldn't it be "a `general` comments folder". Both in the `C#` and the `Go` comments we have a `general` folder for general comments.

Author: Sounds fine with me!

Reviewer 2: Let's make the `$lang.general.xxx` canonical in the docs.

  exception is knowledge from already completed _core_ exercises. Avoid
  "as you know", "as you remember", "as you learned", "now that we all
  understand x", because even though something was said, the person doesn't 
  necessarily understand it.

### Guidance

For the first few exercises of a track, the following is _extra_ important:

- **Name the difference** between what the person is doing, and what is
  'idiomatic' in the language.
- **Use the proper terms** and nomenclature, so people can recognize those
  concepts elsewhere, and also can research them by themselves.
- **Keep it relatively short**, avoiding a wall of text or overwhelming them
  with advice. If they have a great experience in the first exercise, they'll
  come back and you'll have many more opportunities to provide feedback on all
  of the things that you noticed.
- **Don't give the solution** as general advice for all Exercism mentoring. 
  Learning sticks when people discover the answer for themselves. That's a 
  tremendously exhilarating experience, and the emotional kick makes it 
  memorable. However, if the discovery **doesn't** trigger a dopamine hit, it 

>   makes total sense to show what it looks like.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  makes total sense to show what it looks like. For example, we might choose to provide a small improvement on an approved solution will be a lot less exciting than giving someone a learning point on a solution that is being disapproved and therefore may warrant an example rather than a link.
```

- **Don't overly explain a concept**: don't go in depth about the underlying 
  mechanisms of compilers and things. In this case it's more about this being 
  one of the first exercises in the language track, and at this stage feedback
  is more helpful if it's shorter and more directive.
- **Give a link** that shows exactly how to do the concept, in a **tutorial** 
  kind of way. Meaning: showing how to do things, not discussing why. This might
  mean that the official docs of the language don't suffice, as these are often
  a code reference and don't show you how to use it and how it works. _However_,
  you should provide a link only for more in-depth exploration. The person
  should be able to understand what you mean from the answer directly, without
  following the link.

> 

Reviewer 5: **Congratulate the student** They presumably worked hard in completing the exercise and learned something; they deserve some encouragement. Find something positive to say about their code if possible.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure about this, as the comments are used on `auto-mentoring`. It would be a bot saying: "You have done great!".

But I am very interested what @kytrinyx thinks about this.

Reviewer: I agree with @tehsphinx here. I feel that the tone of an automated mentor should be different from a personal mentor, to help make the distinction between what is automated mentoring and what is personal mentoring. As such, I don't feel that the automated mentor should be made more human by adding very human-like sentences. Human mentors should absolutely do such things, but I'm not sure the automated mentor should.

Reviewer 2: If we do choose to praise people (I'm in favour of this, but I seem to be in the minority) then I think this would happen as a covering note of the comments, rather than in the comments themselves. For example, at the moment we say words to the effect of "Your solution has been approved by our automated analyzer. Congratulations! Here are some comments that might also help you."

Reviewer: > "Your solution has been approved by our automated analyzer. Congratulations! Here are some comments that might also help you."

If you verse it like this, I'm perfectly fine with that. It's just that I think we have to be really careful to don't give the impression that there is a human being on the other side.

Author: I think as part of the "be neutral" guideline, we don't want to add emotion to the _comments_. I think as proposed above, I really like the idea of adding it to the "auto-approve summary message".

Author: > Find something positive to say about their code if possible.

For what it's worth, I generally am _very_ positive when mentoring, because every submission is a step forward and I think encouragement is great, but saying something positive for the sake of something positive, in a similar manor as to how _some_ people (and companies) want PR reviews to go, is not something that is appreciated _in every culture_.

For example: In a large cross-section of my personal circles, empty positivity (like "The Praise Sandwich") for the sake of saying something positive, is considered **extremely rude** because it's ingenuous and completely removes meaning which detracts from anyone _actually being positive_.

Being neutral is generally safer.

### Examples

In JavaScript, a student has written a top-level constant with `let`. 

```markdown
<!-- not following these guidelines -->
As you know, everyone uses const, you shouldn't use let or var.
```

This comment is not following these guidelines for the following reasons:

- The action comes after the "explanation".
- "As you know": we don't know if the student does.
- "you shouldn't": you don't need the "you" to make this statement.
- "everyone uses const": this isn't true _and_ can make the student feel as if
  they did something horribly wrong.
- Lacks an actual explanation of _why_ the advice is given.

```markdown
<!-- better -->
Prefer `const` and `let` over `var`. The `const` declaration stops a variable 
from being accidentally reassigned, which provides safety, and reduces 
cognitive load for someone reading the code. [This article](https://medium.com/javascript-scene/javascript-es6-var-let-or-const-ba58b8dcde75) 

> explains the difference between the three.

Reviewer 4: In this example, are we saying that it's fine to use `let`?

Author: With prejudice.

Reviewer 3: Got confused on whether `let` is good or not, as well. I suggest making the example clearer or using another one for this guideline.

Author: Let me see what I can do 😁

know about `errors.New` and `fmt.Errorf` have a look at them as they are much 
simpler ways to create an error. Custom errors are helpful if you want to check 
if an error is of a certain type later.
```

This comment is not following these guidelines for the following reasons:

- "I see": the analyzer is not a person: avoid I.
- "This is perfectly fine!": Apparently it's not otherwise the reassuring wasn't
  necessary. This probably can be left out all together; if you want to give a
  generic tip about something existing, you can say exactly that: "An
  alternative, equally valid way of doing x is y."
- "If you did not know about": Leave this overly wordy word group out.

```markdown
<!-- better -->
A custom `error` is typically used to provide custom behavior, or to distinguish
on type later. For simpler cases, it's more common to rely on `errors.New` or 
`fmt.Errorf`. This [in-depth article](https://golangbot.com/custom-errors/) about 
custom errors might be interesting.
```

[git-website-copy]: https://github.com/exercism/website-copy/tree/master/automated-comments
[issue-ci-comments]: https://github.com/exercism/automated-mentoring-support/issues/51

> [git-website-copy-label]: https://github.com/exercism/website-copy/pulls?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Apr+label%3Atype%2Fanalyzer-comments

Reviewer 4: Should this be `analyzer-comments-prs` instead of `git-website-copy-label`?

Author: 🤷‍♂ just a link label (never displayed) -- I don't mind to change it hehe 😁
